Add GUI standards docs (#28478)
mantidproject/mantid: dev-docs/source/Standards/GUIStandards.rst

All notifications need to go through a single point
---------------------------------------------------

- Becomes obvious when it's starting to grow outwards
- Prevents dead code paths, and multiple code paths to do the same thing
- Makes debugging significantly easier

Firstly, having a single method in your presenter handle every notification
means you can put a single break-point when debugging. Imagine a future dev
trying to figure out why that field in the GUI keeps changing, 
but no breakpoints hit because you made another notification handler. Now
imagine you're that future dev.....

The other aspect is having a single method that's growing beyond 30 lines
is painfully obvious. Maybe you have some dead code paths that need to be 
trimmed out, maybe you are suffering from scope creep or maybe your notifier
is doing model logic. In any case it's easier to spot now rather than 
in 5 different places.

Do not let Qt types in
-----------------------

- Keep non-standard types contained inside the view
- Some debuggers can't see what these type values are
- You then only have to think about one type instead of doing conversions everywhere

> To use use a cliché, when you have a hammer suddenly everything looks like a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a cliché, when you have a hammer suddenly everything looks like a
```
Sorry 😅

Author: Should be fixed, thanks for noticing

- Run your workflow algorithm from the GUI, then re-run it as a script

Imagine your GUI could be swapped for a CLI for users, would it still work on the back-end?

Presenter
=========

.. _notifications_through_single_point:

All notifications need to go through a single point
---------------------------------------------------

- Becomes obvious when it's starting to grow outwards
- Prevents dead code paths, and multiple code paths to do the same thing
- Makes debugging significantly easier

Firstly, having a single method in your presenter handle every notification
means you can put a single break-point when debugging. Imagine a future dev
trying to figure out why that field in the GUI keeps changing, 
but no breakpoints hit because you made another notification handler. Now
imagine you're that future dev.....

The other aspect is having a single method that's growing beyond 30 lines
is painfully obvious. Maybe you have some dead code paths that need to be 
trimmed out, maybe you are suffering from scope creep or maybe your notifier
is doing model logic. In any case it's easier to spot now rather than 
in 5 different places.

Do not let Qt types in
-----------------------

> - Keep non-standard types contained outside the view

Reviewer: Do you mean
```suggestion
- Keep non-standard types contained inside the view
```
?

- Some debuggers can't see what these type values are
- You then only have to think about one type instead of doing conversions everywhere

> To use stretch a metaphor, when you have a hammer suddenly everything looks like a

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
To use a cliché, when you have a hammer suddenly everything looks like a
```
?

nail: Many developers will use conversions (hammer) at the last second to 
coerce their type (nail) into something "standard" which the rest of the 
code-base uses at the point they need it. 

You only notice something is wrong when you've put in so many conversions that
it's either hard to keep track of what the type is at this point (Python), or

> you can't see into them debugging (C++). It dawns on you that the wooden chair
> you were building is 90% nails and you're not sure which ones hold it together and
> which are responsible for it being incredibly uncomfortable.

Reviewer: I understand the metaphor until this sentence about the chair, it doesn't really follow on from what you said so I would just take it out.
```suggestion
you can't see into them debugging (C++).
```

Author: Gone, I was on the fence about it

.. _notifications_through_single_point:

All notifications need to go through single point
-------------------------------------------------

- Becomes obvious when it's starting to grow outwards
- Prevents dead code paths, and multiple code paths to do the same thing
- Makes debugging significantly easier

Firstly, having a single method in your presenter handle every notification
means you can put a single break-point when debugging. Imagine a future dev
trying to figure out why that field in the GUI keeps changing, 
but no breakpoints hit because you made another notification handler. Now
imagine your that future dev.....

The other aspect is having a single method that's growing beyond 30 lines
is painfully obvious. Maybe you have some dead code paths that need to be 
trimmed out, maybe you are suffering from scope creep or maybe your notifier
is doing model logic. Either way it's obvious to spot now rather than in 5
different places.

Do not let Qt types in
-----------------------

- Keep non-standard types contained outside the view
- Some debuggers can't see what these type values are
- You then only have to think about one type instead of doing conversions everywhere

> To use abuse analogy, when you have a hammer suddenly everything looks like a

Author: `To stretch a metaphor` ?

Also did the metaphor help or detract from the point, I was unsure whether to put it in?

cusp of having to split a file and any extra features will force you to do it
or you've spent extra time refactoring last time so it should be quicker next.

Encourage newer staff to raise queries
--------------------------------------

- Are you solving a symptom for a user, rather than their actual problem

What separates a good product from a great one from a user perspective is
recognising what problem someone is trying to solve rather than the symptoms.
Taking a step back and asking what problem someone is trying to solve can
sometimes yield better solutions, such as writing a script or tweaking a
workflow algorithm.

For example, are they asking for a tick box for something which is almost always
true except for once a year? In this case can we add an option to the 
workflow alg but not the GUI, that way most users can't get it wrong. Then write
a script which does it once a year for those power users who need that feature.

- Newer devs: talk to more experienced devs, ask if there is a better way to do stuff?

Invite them along to your user meetings to sit back and help. They're should not
be there to run your meeting or take over. Instead they might recognise something

> that another group might have done, or a potential problem or even a hidden

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that another group has done, a potential problem or even a hidden
```

solution.

> Feel comfortable to say no (in gentler terms) whenever you think something is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel comfortable saying no (in gentler terms) whenever you think something is
```

would be perfectly adequate.

When in doubt raise it through your management chain, they're there to help!

- Experienced devs: check the dialogue is happening 

Ask to go to meetings with newer devs until you feel like they can recognise
the various components and tools available from Mantid for solving problems.

Check that the requirement gathering, estimation process and UX design steps
are being done with the group. Encourage developers to partake in negotiating
what work is appropriate and where it should be scheduled. 

Watch out for things being added mid-sprint silently, newer devs can feel 
obligated to complete the planned work in addition to the extra work. This
can cause burn out and setup an unofficial mechanism where requests will bypass
the sprint planning mechanism.

Periodically revise best UX practice
------------------------------------
  
- Ask experienced UX Devlopers
- Multiple online resources exist:
- `NNGroup <https://www.nngroup.com/ux-conference/>`__

Testing
========

If you have too many dependencies to inject...
----------------------------------------------

- First consider if your making the problem worse by adding

> - Having too many deps is a sign your doing too much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Having too many deps is a sign you're doing too much
```

Check if your suffering from scope creep that you can resolve, not adding
DI and relying on mechanisms such as patching disguises this problem.

- Look at using a factory pattern if you really must pass lots of args through

If your adding tests to existing code or require major refactoring work
consider adding a factory class which allows you to get all your dependencies.
This is injected instead and the constructor calls a builder method for each
dependency, the testing class will inherit and override to inject mocks.

- Last resort is to create a test class as a friend of the presenter

> This should be considered a last resort as it also opens to avenue to manipulate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should be considered a last resort as it also opens the avenue to manipulate
```

> the internals of the class under test. Tests which manipulate internals are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the internals of the class under test conditions. Tests which manipulate internals are
```

no longer testing a public API and are usually a sign you have a helper class 
lurking inside.

Use dependency injection
------------------------

- Dependency Injection makes it clear what needs to be mocked out for each test
- Keep the number of deps low and have a param for each one in the constructor

Dependency injection should be used to inject various mock objects, this
is a well established pattern that has been shown to simplify tests when used well.

If you have a constructor which has several args due to DI your MVP code has
probably started suffering scope creep. Can you either create new classes
to encapsulate multiple dependencies, or create a new MVP set?

- You may have an problem with the entry point code for production

Look at the maintenance guide or dev documentation, some interfaces will use

> a top window view which creates the real instances to inject into it's children.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a top window view which creates the real instances to inject into its children.
```

By keeping it in the view (not model or presenter) we follow the standard,
if you can't test it put it in the view.

Use dependency injection in Python too
--------------------------------------

> - Should DI in Python too! This will also future proof you for growth too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You should use DI in Python too! This will also future proof you for growth too.
```

- Use this over patching wherever possible

Patching can be difficult to get right, resulting in lots of copy and paste
code. Instead DI can be done once in the setup method of your unit test class.
This will make it easier to add new tests in the future too since you've
already done the work in your setup.

Getting the path right can be difficult and developers have to learn

> various rules about how things are imported into different namespace which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
various rules about how things are imported into different namespaces which
```

> is only really used for these tests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are only really used for these tests.
```

Assume that anything in the view is difficult to test internally, but is
tested elsewhere. For example, it doesn't make sense to check if Matplotlib
still opens plots if you ask it to show a figure.

Ultimately, anything that goes in the view has to be tested manually, so
less code means fewer ways for it to silently break without manual testing noticing.

- Have one or two very generic methods handle a lot of calls to an API

Having one or two very generic methods handle all calls to an API will
mean if it ever broke it would break everything in your GUI at once, making it
obvious where the problem is. Having 6 different ways to plot from the view
for example means you now need to test 6 different plotting methods in your
presenter manually.

.. _cant_test_in_view:

If you can test it, take it out of the view
-------------------------------------------

- Look out for small logic snippets creeping into the view
- For loops in the view are somewhere logic usually gets hidden in
- A view API should have everything prepared for it and be as "dumb" as possible

It's very easy to have a for loop in a view which starts off iterating 

> through a list then adding extra steps whilst your there. The view should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through a list then adding extra steps while you're there. The view should
```

have this all pre-prepared for it in a way that any for loops take an object,
unpack it and forward it to an API only.

For example, if you need to group 12 items into 3 boxes of 4 in the view
don't put the grouping into the view. Instead pack them into a list of lists

> or create new struct (C++) / POD class (Python) to hold this and iterate through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or create a new struct (C++) / POD class (Python) to hold this and iterate through
```

that instead.

> - Go line by line and think, "could I test just this line alone"?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Go line by line and think, "could I test just this line alone?"
```

For certain lines such as calling Qt there would be no possible way to tell
if a test passed or not, or if they use view only types
(see :ref:`keep_qt_in_view` ) then they can stay.

If a line would have an expected output it might need moving to the model 
instead. Consider using mocks if the input types it expects are difficult.

One signal per slot, never multiple
-----------------------------------

- Signals should always have a 1:1 mapping with slots
- Makes it obvious if the combo is broken

> Signals and slots should always be paired up, but never more. It can look

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signals and slots should always be paired up, but never more than 1:1. It can look
```

-----------------------------------------------

- Views should only signal the presenter
- There should not be signals firing other signals in the same view

Signals that go to the view are almost impossible to automatically test,
since the side effects are invisible to the presenter unless more signals
are then chained up.

In addition it can lead to logic ending up in the view which goes against
:ref:`logic_goes_into_the_model` . This should be combined with 
:ref:`notifications_through_single_point` in your presenter which
should then switch to a non-Qt notification method
:ref:`use_non_qt_comms_presenter`. Combining all of 
these patterns ensures that everything can be tested in an automated fashion.

************
Future Work
************

Coding
======

Naming conventions
------------------

- Outstanding work to unify across the project
- Need to document what patterns exist
- Look at harmonising into the future, maybe meet and decide going into the future

Docs
=====
- Look at writing a document detailing how each GUI is structured for next maintenance period
- Add structure to dev-docs, and add files into that. Move maintenance guides into there

> - Add examples where could should be broken down

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add examples where code should be broken down
```
?
